Introduction
In 2021, I read an article titled “The Religious Right’s Rhetoric Fueled the Insurrection.” The article connected the events of January 6th to the views of various religious groups. The article’s argument wasn’t particularly compelling, but the photo associated with the article was. It showed a banner being carried by individuals at a pro-Trump event that read: “Trump is President, Christ is King.” 

It is possible—though unlikely—that those holding the sign were attempting to summarize Romans 13:1-7. Christ is, indeed, King and at the time Trump was president. Perhaps those holding the sign also showed up at Biden rallies holding a banner reading, “Biden is President, Christ is King.” As I said, possible, but not likely. 

The sign seemed to connect Christ’s kingship with Trump’s presidency in a different way. It was not an orthodox theological statement but a distorted political one. It suggested that Trump’s presidency demonstrated Christ’s kingship in a unique way—in a way another presidency could not. Yet, one need not look far into the Old Testament to recognize the problem with such a view. God was no less King when God’s servant Nebuchadnezzar ascended to power (Jer 27:5) than when king Josiah sat on the throne (2 Kgs 22:1-23:30). Cyrus, king of Persia, was God’s anointed instrument to bring the Jews back to the land (Isa 45:1; cf. Isa 44:28; 2 Chron 36:22). God’s sovereignty is not contingent on which ruler happens to be in office. 

In the end, we may say that the sign manipulates theological language to make a political point. Like the sign, we often encounter individuals and groups who use familiar words with different meanings—deploying biblical and theological concepts detached from God’s revelation—to advance political claims. They represent reality in a way that portrays God as less sovereign over and more servant to national aims. Looking beyond the political realm, the world’s stories more generally deny and distort God. They promote a twisted form of discipleship that shapes humanity into something other than the image of Christ. 

We are bombarded with headlines, posts, reels, soundbites, and news reports that present an incomplete representation of reality as if it were complete. These stories don’t just misinform; they shape us into people who live according to a distorted understanding of reality. They dull our senses so that our eyes don’t see as clearly, and our ears don’t hear as well. If Christians are to resist being discipled by such narratives, we need a way of discerning that goes deeper than fact-checking. We need a framework that helps us consider all the ways of knowing so that we remain grounded in God’s reality rather than the world’s distortions.  That framework is what I call the Quad. 

What is the Quad?
The Quad is a framework for Christian discernment designed to help God’s people engage information with a calm, thoughtful, and theological posture. It provides four lenses for reflection that may be expressed as a set of questions: 

	•	What is being claimed or asserted? (Propositional Knowing) 
	•	How do one’s skills—or lack thereof—influence influence the information presented? (Procedural Knowing)
	•	What is being considered relevant, and why? (Perspectival Knowing)
	•	How do various elements of a given context shape one’s understanding of human identity, the world, and their interaction? (Participatory Knowing)

These questions are adapted from the work of cognitive psychologist John Vervaeke. Vervaeke posits four ways of knowing: propositional, procedural, perspectival, and participatory. By turning these ways of knowing into a set of questions, the Quad provides a multi-layered approach to evaluating the information we consume—representations of reality pointing to events, objects, people, and truth claims. It helps us see where our disagreements lie so that we can move beyond the distractions of superficial conflict and toward a deeper, theological understanding of the world. 

Unpacking the Quad
To use the Quad effectively, we need to understand each of its four dimensions. Each way of knowing allows us to analyze a different aspect of the information we are consuming. 

Quadrant One: Propositional Knowing
Propositional knowing is about “knowing that.” It is the domain of facts, concepts, and assertions—the sort of knowledge that can be evaluated as true or false. This is often what we have in mind when we speak about knowledge—a relatively stable body of content that can be evaluated as true or false.

For instance, we might know that Genesis is the first book of the Old Testament, or that the Lord’s prayer begins with “Our Father.” These are facts that anyone could know. Other propositional statements may be more contested. Saying, “I know that Elvis is alive” or “I know that bigfoot exists” are still claims to “know that,” but the plausibility of such claims would likely come under some scrutiny.

Christian confessions also involve propositional knowing. While many in our culture reduce religious convictions to personal opinion or “leaps of faith,” saying, “I know that Jesus is Lord” is a propositional truth claim—it asserts Jesus’s authority over all things in heaven and earth (Matt 28:18). It may be increasingly common to think of religious convictions as “true for me,” but they are not opinions or preferences. Saying “I know that Jesus is Lord” is an assertion about what has been revealed to and recognized by God’s people. It is a claim about the nature of reality that will be verified or falsified at some future point. 

Quadrant Two: Procedural Knowing 
We not only “know that.” We also “know how.” Procedural knowing involves our skills, abilities, and competencies. This form of knowledge makes abstract knowledge concrete. It is often tacit and implicit. While we might be able to describe the process of pedaling a bike, it is much harder to explain how you flex and coordinate the postural muscles needed to balance on two wheels. We know how to do it because we’ve acquired the skill through practice. It isn’t a claim. It’s a skill. 

Procedural knowledge can influence how we represent reality—the arguments we make, the activities we pursue, and even the events we find significant. For example, when I teach the book of Genesis, I don’t discuss scientific perspectives on the creation story and the flood. Instead, I focus on interpretive and theological matters. I’ve been trained in Hebrew, genre analysis, and theology. I have skills in that area. Procedural knowing, then, influences what I do and how I do it. “Knowing how” and “not knowing how” shape the way we convey and consume information. 

Quadrant Three: Perspectival Knowing 
Vervaeke describes perspectival knowing as “knowing from a point-of-view.” It involves a situated awareness—a way of identifying what is relevant within our environment. Perspectival knowing operates in context. In any given situation, it is what we use to orient ourselves within a moment. 

Normally, we think of the world as something we observe or examine. In perspectival knowing, however, it can be helpful to think in terms of the world disclosing itself to us. Our environment draws our attention. It influences us so that what is relevant moves to the foreground while other concerns fade into the background.

Think for a moment about how much we ignore in order to focus on what matters. For example, when you are driving on the highway, you are (hopefully) attending to the other cars on the road. You aren’t fixating on every mile marker or billboard. Those structures fade to the background because they are less relevant while the movements of the vehicles around you demand your attention. 

From a theological perspective, perspectival knowing involves recognizing that the Triune God is infinitely more relevant than any other actor or factor we will ever encounter. We attend to God in every situation because, through his past and ongoing self-disclosure, we learn to see the world from a point-of-view in which God’s presence, activity, and provision are unmistakable.  

Quadrant Four: Participatory Knowing 
Participatory knowing is “knowing by being.” It denotes the agent-arena relationship in which a mutual shaping occurs between an agent and their environment. We interact with our environment in a process of reciprocal formation. Participatory knowing is closely tied to our individual and collective identities, through which we co-create meaning with other people and with creation itself. 

To understand this way of knowing, consider the difference between a bath and a baptism. Both involve the immersion of a body in water, yet we do not confuse the two. A bath is mundane. It can even be replaced by a shower. A baptism, by contrast, carries deep symbolic and theological meaning. While both involve water, a body, and immersion, the environment in which they take place makes them different.

We recognize a bath because it occurs in a bathroom, usually in private, surrounded by everyday items like soap, towels, and rubber duckies. Baths involve things like soap and towels. Baptisms, by contrast, are public, communal acts performed in a church. They are framed by a liturgy that gives the action symbolic and theological depth. The coordination of a profession of faith, ritual action, and the witness of the congregation co-create the baptism. If someone went into the sanctuary alone and jumped in the baptistry, would you consider that a baptism? Likely not. 

Participatory knowing isn’t simply about who we are, but who we are becoming. It involves conforming to reality’s claim on us. For Christians, this means responding to the reality of the Triune God. It is a form of knowing that emerges from being in and belonging to God’s reality so that we participate with God, others, and creation to become a living testimony to the gospel.   

Using these four ways of knowing to evaluate the information we consume helps us identify where our disagreements actually lie. For instance, we won’t always disagree at the propositional knowing level. We may disagree on the procedural, perspectival, or participatory levels. To illustrate how the Quad can help us analyze a claim, consider the following argument made by Pastor Jack Hibbs regarding “replacement theology” (the view that the church has replaced Israel in God’s purposes):

“Replacement theology is known by several names that you may have heard of: covenant theology, fulfillment theology, expansion theology, and restoration theology, among others. Whatever name it goes by, replacement theology has no scriptural basis and ignores the facts. Be that as it may, well-known progressive pastors and seminary professors are substituting the church for Israel in their interpretation of Scripture. While replacement theology is popular today, it has ancient roots. Second-century fringe Christian communities taught that because the Jews rejected Jesus Christ as Messiah at His first coming, God, in turn, rejected them entirely. But that is not correct…The prophetic revelations of the Old Testament are so clear that they frustrate those who refuse to believe God’s great commitment to Israel in the last days. In fact, hear me clearly on this: If God does not keep his future promises to Israel and the Jewish people, then He has no obligation whatsoever to keep His New Testament promises to you, me, and the church.”

	•	Propositional knowing: Hibbs asserts that “replacement theology has no scriptural basis and ignores the facts.” While Hibbs goes on to argue his case, the claim that replacement theology has no scriptural basis is disputable at best. For instance, a number of biblical texts suggest that (a) Israel has not been replaced by the church and (b) Israel and the church are not as distinct as Hibbs seems to suggest (Rom 11:17-24; Gal 3:7; Eph 2:19; 1 Pet 2:9).  

	•	Procedural knowing: Hibbs doesn’t provide any secondary sources to support his assertions. While I would not presume to say that Hibbs lacks the ability to make a scholarly argument, his decision not to support some of his claims is a procedural choice. He opts for more of a top-level rhetorical approach rather than making a sustained, well-supported argument. 

For example, Hibbs notes, “Second-century fringe Christian communities taught that because the Jews rejected Jesus Christ as Messiah at His first coming, God, in turn, rejected them entirely.” Who are these groups? Hibbs doesn’t name them. Could he have someone like Justin Martyr in mind? Writing in the 2nd century, Justin Martyr argued that “we who keep the commandments of Christ, are, by virtue of Christ who begat us unto God, both called and in fact are, Jacob and Israel and Judah and Joseph and David, and true children of God.” Martyr should not be framed as the first replacement theologian or even the first reformed theologian. Such categories would be anachronistic; however, Martyr’s discussion demonstrates that the relationship between Israel and the church has been in question throughout church history. 

Procedural knowing, then, highlights not just what is claimed but the skills brought to bear in a given instance. In this case, Hibbs does not demonstrate skill in building an argument from sources. He relies on his skills as a communicator to make his case. Again, Hibbs likely has the skill to make a more scholarly case. The point is not to suggest that he lacks that ability, but to note that he chooses not to use it in this particular argument.  

	•	Perspectival knowing: Hibbs approaches replacement theology from a dispensational perspective. In certain forms of dispensational theology, there is a relatively sharp distinction between Israel and the church and an insistence on the literal fulfillment of Old Testament promises made to Israel. For Hibbs, Israel’s continuing covenantal distinctiveness is highly relevant, overshadowing the nuances emphasized within Reformed and covenant theology.

Because replacement theology eliminates a place for Israel and, in his view, distorts biblical prophecy, Hibbs treats it as false teaching advanced by “fringe” groups and “progressive” teachers who read Scripture incorrectly. His perspectival knowing makes defending Israel’s place in God’s plan—and the modern-day nation of Israel—crucial. From this perspective, replacement theology becomes a watershed issue and, to some degree, a litmus test for orthodoxy. 

	•	Participatory knowing: Hibbs’ perspective on Israel is not simply a matter of interpretation; it reflects the way he understands his (and the church’s) relationship with God and the world. God’s faithfulness hinges on a particular interpretation of how God will keep his promises. While Hibbs states, “If God does not keep his promises to Israel and the Jewish people…,” he is really saying something else—he is saying that if God does not keep his promise in the way Hibbs has concluded he will, God cannot be trusted to keep his promises to the church. He has co-created a vision of reality—a way the world works—that depends on God being faithful to Israel in a particular way.

In Hibbs’ framework, God’s covenant faithfulness—the reason we can trust God to do what he has promised—hinges on the distinction between Israel and the church. As Hibbs asserts, “If God does not keep his future promises to Israel and the Jewish people, then He has no obligation whatsoever to keep his New Testament promises to you, me, and the church.” 

Hibbs’ participatory knowing reveals a vision of reality—a way that the world works—in which Israel’s ongoing, separate covenantal distinctiveness is crucial. His construal of a trusting agent-arena relationship with God is, to some degree, dependent on and mediated through God’s promises to Israel. Some other plausible, if not probable, understanding of the Bible’s teachings on Israel simply won’t do for Hibbs.

Hopefully this analysis of Hibbs’ statement illustrates the various places where disagreements can arise. It is not only a matter of disputing a particular assertion or interpretation (propositional knowing). We also need to consider how an argument is made and what skills or competencies the one presenting it demonstrates while making it (procedural knowing). We may disagree about what is presented to us as relevant since something can be true without being significant (perspectival knowing). Finally, as Christians, we may disagree at the level of our way of being in the world (participatory knowing). There is, for instance, a fundamental difference between a being-in-the-world-with-the-Triune God and a being-in-the-world-without-the-Triune God. As the Hibbs example suggests, Christians may also disagree among ourselves about how our practices—in this case, practices toward Israel—shape the way God and world disclose themselves to us.  

Hibbs’ statement leaves little room for other plausible theological perspectives. As such, Israel is not simply more relevant for Hibbs, or relevant in a different way (perspectival knowing) but indispensable. Israel functions as a guarantor of God’s reliability. If God abandons Israel by not fulfilling his promises according to a specific scheme, the he cannot be trusted to keep any promise. Hibbs’ statement suggests that his agent-arena relationship with God is mediated through God’s promises to Israel—if those promises fail, his world collapses. 

This treatment of Hibbs is not intended to identify some logical flaw in Hibbs’ theological thought. It is offered as an illustration of how the Quad can be used to evaluate an assertion. Rather than simply agreeing or disagreeing with Hibbs’ readings overall, the Quad allows us to pinpoint where we disagree and why. More important, however, it helps us, as Christians, to clarify our own theological disposition—our sense of how the world works. By coming to understand why and how we agree or disagree with information we consume, we also come to understand our own ways of knowing more deeply. 

Reacting to information in an unreflective manner has a double effect: we fail to understand what is outside of us—others and the world—and we fail to understand ourselves. Knee-jerk responses don’t lead to greater insight. As we utilize the Quad, we gain insight into how to live with an uncompromising faith in a world that encourages us not to. 

The Quad and Christian Discipleship
In Simulacra and Simulation, postmodern philosopher Jean Baudrillard argues that modern societies increasingly live by representations rather than reality itself. He uses the image of a map to illustrate his point. A map depicts a territory, but it is not the territory itself. Baudrillard suggests that, in many cases, we are trading the territory for the map. As representation shape how people understand the world, they begin to create the reality people inhabit. Rather than pointing back to something real—the territory—the representations—the maps—take on a life of their own. The result is a world in which images and stories feel more real, influential, and compelling than reality itself.

A helpful illustration of what Baudrillard describes can be found in Her (2013). In the film, Theodore develops a romantic relationship with an artificial intelligence called Samantha. Samantha presents herself in ways that convincingly mirror human behavior and intimacy. She listens attentively, expresses affection, and responds with emotional nuance. What makes the relationship compelling is not that Samantha points Theodore back to real human relationships, but that she increasingly replaces them. 

In Baudrillard’s terms, Samantha is a representation that has replaced reality. She does not simulate a relationship in order to prepare Theodore for embodied intimacy. Instead, she produces an experience of relationship that feels more real, more attentive, and more comfortable than relationships with other human beings. The image of relationship precedes and displaces the reality of relationship. Theodore is not deceived by an outright falsehood; he knows Samantha is not human. Rather, he participates in a world of meaning in which the depiction of relationship becomes a substitute for an embodied, covenantal, and reciprocal relationship with an actual human being. The result is not simply confusion about what is true, but a growing preference for representations over reality.

Baudrillard was not writing as a Christian. Even so, his analysis points to a problem Christians need to take seriously: when representations become detached from reality, they distance us from the truth. The world is becoming increasingly proficient at telling compelling stories that distance us from God. The world’s stories are not in touch with reality. To the extent that God’s people embrace them, we also lose touch with reality. We buy into representations detached from God (simulacra) that seem so real that we no longer recognize God as infinitely more relevant than any other actor or factor we may face. We follow a flawed map toward the hyperreal, adopting a world of meaning that has perverted reality by divorcing itself from God. 

The problem is not always outright falsehood. As John Stuart Mill notes, “the besetting danger is not so much of embracing falsehood for truth, as of mistaking part of the truth for the whole.” Distorted stories often involve premature closure. They claim to be more complete than they actually are. The world’s stories tend to promote this sort of closure because they do not recognize the Bible as God’s disclosure. By denying God’s revelation, they describe reality without the divine insight necessary to understand the world. They create, promote, and reinforce an understanding of the world that opposes God.

This dynamic points to the necessity of the Quad. Its questions disrupt the world’s stories and expose instances of premature closure. Christians can have confidence in God’s revelation. We can develop a sure understanding of the world, but even the surest knowledge is incomplete. Every object, event, or claim can be analyzed at multiple levels, many of which we cannot perceive without assistance. For example, when we look at a coffee cup, we don’t normally concern ourselves with its chemical composition or what is happening on an atomic level—we just want it to hold our coffee. We analyze from a particular perspective and not others.

The Quad acknowledges the stability of propositional knowing while recognizing the embodied nature of all knowing. It affirms the constraints of doctrine while leaving room for God to act within those constraints in ways we can’t always predict. The cross is the ultimate example. In Christ’s suffering and death, we see the paradox of Christian victory: the conquering lamb (Rev 17:14). Even Christ’s closest followers had difficulty grasping what was happening (Matt 16:21-23). By resisting premature closure, the Quad helps Christians look with eyes that see and listen with ears that hear. 

This aspect of the Quad promotes Christian discipleship by rooting us in God’s reality rather than the world’s hyperreality. Those representations detached from reality (hyperreality) form us into the image of something other than Christ. They train us to love the world on its terms and to live by its rules. Christian discipleship cannot happen in hyperreality because hyperreality diminishes God and his creation, promoting an order in which God is no longer sovereign over all things, but subject to humanity’s whims. 

The Quad allows Christians to see their convictions (e.g., “Jesus is Lord”) not merely as assertions of fact (propositional knowing), but as skilled obedience (procedural knowing), wise discernment (perspectival knowing), and interaction with God (participatory knowing). Knowing at all four levels is crucial to following “the way, the truth, and the life” (Jn 14:6).  

In addition to resisting closure, the Quad fosters what we might call theological flow. Flow is often associated with “being in the zone.” It is “a mode of heightened attention and performance that increases our general competence and problem-solving.” Vervaeke argues that achieving a flow state “depends on our ability to cultivate kinds of knowing that are independent from mere statements of belief: knowing how to do something, knowing what it is like to have a certain perspective and what it is to know something by identifying with it and participating in it.” 

In a Christian sense, theological flow reflects the integration of the four ways of knowing into a life of faithful discipleship. We are not, like the demons who know that God is one (Jam 2:19) but do not repent, to isolate propositional knowing from embodied obedience and wisdom. Deuteronomy 17 provides a helpful example of this integration and embodiment. Israel’s future king is instructed to write a copy of the law that is to be approved by the priests (17:18). While the king will certainly learn what the law says (propositional knowing), writing and reading it is intended to cultivate a fear of the Lord (17:19). That fear is evident through ongoing obedience (17:19-20)—a faithful participation with God in the world. 

The king can’t simply memorize the law. He must embody it so that his judgment and wisdom are shaped by God’s law. To paraphrase Vervaeke, the king is supposed to develop a heightened attention and performance directed toward God, so that the king’s life and rule reflect God’s order. The king is to become mature so that he enters a state of theological flow in which the challenges of ruling are aimed at glorifying God. The Quad functions in a similar fashion by prompting God’s people to consistently reflect on all aspects of their knowing. It nurtures theological flow by pushing us beyond mere assertions to a whole life knowing that integrates skill, perspective, and participation. In this way, it trains disciples to live wisely by living according to God’s reality. 

Why This Matters
The digital world pushes us to make connections quickly, judging new information based on whether it fits with the stories we have already accepted. Digital content is often fast, shallow, and unnuanced. It lends itself to intuitive reactions rather than deep, reflective thought. After all, who has time for that? 

The Quad helps us slow down our thinking. Attending to the four ways of knowing requires a more deliberate and methodical approach to evaluating the content we consume. The Quad trains us to do more than identify whether a claim is true or false. It pushes us to consider how the skills of a given content creator influence what they treat as relevant and which aspects of reality are involved in the process of co-creation. The goal of using the Quad is to understand an issue deeply and to resist the temptation to make snap judgments in situations that require more serious theological reflection. Thinking slowly is not always necessary, but the Quad provides a framework for serious deliberation when it is. 

This slower pace matters because digital content is largely unfiltered. Anyone can present information, regardless of skill, character, or accountability. In such an environment, procedural competence becomes especially significant, since a person’s abilities influence what they deem relevant and how they frame the world for others. Content is not simply a collection of truth claims; it is always intertwined with points of view, competencies, and understandings of the way various elements combine to shape a symbolic world of meaning. The Quad helps Christians cultivate a reflective posture that does more than evaluate claims or critique narratives. It enables us to understand how others know the world. In so doing, we can engage others as calm, thoughtful, theological thinkers whose patience, curiosity, and care for others are evident. 

Conclusion
The Quad reminds us that discipleship in a digital age isn’t merely about facts. It is about being formed into a people who see, think, and live according to God’s reality. The world tempts us with hyperrealities—stories, images, and claims that demand our attention while distorting the truth. Those distortions are often subtle, co-opting him in ways that make it difficult to distinguish the world’s hyperreality from God’s reality. 

The Quad’s four questions help Christians draw lines between the real and the hyperreal. They invite us to engage in a robust discernment process, considering not only what is being claimed but how the arguments are constructed, what is identified as relevant, and what assumptions are made about the crucial interactions between God, humanity, and the rest of creation. In doing so, God’s people begin to recognize the deeper sources of disagreement—those that derive from denying reality, particularly the reality of God—and resist premature closure that ignores God’s revelation. 

The Quad is not simply a method for critical reflection. It is a reflective discipleship practice. It cultivates theological flow, integrating all four ways of knowing as we grow in maturity. God’s people, like Israel’s king, are called to embody wisdom—living aligned with God’s order. The Quad allows for calm, thoughtful, theological engagement in an age where emergencies and noise have become all too common. It offers a framework for living in God’s reality, so that we are not discipled into the world’s illusions but by the reality of God who is present among us. It offers a framework for living in God’s reality, so that we are not discipled into the world’s illusions but formed by the God who is present among us. 

