Dispositions Chapter
Introduction
As a sophomore in college, I was a mess, though only those close to me would have known it. I was attending a good school, getting solid grade, working a couple of part-time jobs, and avoiding many of the usual trappings of college life like sex, drugs, and alcohol. The problem was that none of it mattered to me. I found no meaning in anything I was doing. I believed life would eventually become a tedious set of chores that I didn’t want to do. I considered suicide but could not find a way to kill myself without appearing pathetic. I adopted a “live fast, die young” approach to life, deciding that dying stupid was better than dying weak.

During that time in my life, I didn’t have a good sense of how the world works—though I thought I did. I had adopted the perspective of the great philosopher John Cougar Mellencamp whose philosophical treatise Jack and Diane (1982) argues, “Oh yeah, life goes on. Long after the thrill of livin’ is gone.” I wanted to avoid life after the thrill. 

After committing my life to Christ, I developed a different sense of the way the world works—a new disposition. By disposition, I mean an emerging sense of how the world works, what matters most, what can be trusted, and how one ought to respond in complex situations. That new disposition required me to unwind certain ideas about the world and my interactions with it. It wasn’t just a matter of following a new set of rules, though it often seemed like that’s what people wanted me to do. It involved a more fundamental renovation of my understanding of reality.

For instance, I found that I needed to rethink concepts like prioritization. My favorite Bible verses, part of which I have tattooed on my upper arm, are Deuteronomy 6:4-5. These verses speak of loving God with all we are and have. Treating God as one priority among others doesn’t fit with an unqualified and unreserved love for God. Think of dividing a pie chart into the time you’ll spend with God, family, work, and so on. Even if 99.9 percent of the chart were dedicated to “God time,” we would be holding something back. Prioritization of this sort fails because it reserves space for something other than God. It allows us to hold aspects of ourselves back from him. 

Scripture acknowledges that we must make choices about how we spend our time. Humans are limited creatures and cannot address everything all at once. Priorities, in that sense, are not the problem. The problem arises when we treat God as one priority among others. All other priorities are nested in our love for God, and that love shapes the way we think about every other choice we make. Unqualified love for God does not eliminate other loves, but orders them and governs the way we relate to them. 

In addition to clarifying our relationship with God, our disposition—our sense of the way the world works—provides an anchoring point for us as we navigate the practically infinite amount of information available in a digital age. Our disposition enables a different kind of discernment. If, for instance, we believe unqualified obedience to God makes the world work, we are likely to pursue that course. To put it differently, the conviction that Jesus is “the way, and the truth, and the life” (Jn 14:6) shapes our desires, ambitions, and decisions so that we are increasingly conformed to the image of Christ. Developing a Christian disposition—a sense that the way the world works is demonstrated by and rooted in Christ—frees our minds from the logics of the world and opens us up to the theo-logic revealed by God’s word and driven by God’s Spirit (1 Cor 2:6-16). 

Developing such a disposition involves at least three aspects: (1) reordering our loves, (2) reorienting our attention, and (3) responding to God. These aspects become intelligible when we set aside certain notions of prioritization in favor of concepts like nesting and habitus—the way we think about and respond to the social worlds we inhabit. Each of these concepts allows us to consider our loves, attention, and responses from a theological perspective. 

Reordered Loves and Russian Nesting Dolls
When I was young, my parents and I often visited my grandparents on the weekend. They lived on a farm, so there was always plenty to do. On rainy days, I would go back to the closet and pull out old toys my grandmother had saved from when my mom, aunts, and uncle were kids. Though the Lincoln Logs were my favorites, I also remember an old set of Russian nesting dolls. The idea behind the dolls is that they are similar in shape but not size. This allowed the dolls to fit inside one another with the largest doll containing all the others. The smaller dolls are nested within the larger dolls. 

In The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, psychologist James J. Gibson introduced the term “nesting” as a way of looking at the world. Nesting seems like a relatively simple concept: smaller unites are embedded within larger ones. As Gibson notes, “There are events within events, as there are forms within forms…You can describe the events of the environment at various levels.” Let’s think about what this might mean for the order of love (ordo amoris) by considering an example of un-nested loves—loyalties that are not shaped and governed by an unqualified loyalty to God. 

In a 2025 interview on Fox News, Vice President J. D. Vance tied his understanding of the ordo amoris to the governance of the United States, noting, “There is an old school and I think it’s a very Christian concept…that you love your family and then you love your neighbor and then you love your community and then you love your fellow citizens in your own country, and then, after that, you can focus on and prioritize the rest of the world.” He goes on to suggest that the “far left’s” inversion of this ordering, which privileges other countries and citizens over the United States, “is no way to run a society.” Unfortunately, Vance’s conception fails theologically and politically, in part, because he misunderstands the idea of nesting. The theological failure is that family, neighbor, and nation are treated as relatively autonomous spheres that can be loved sequentially, rather than as loves immersed in and governed by our love for God, which determines when and how all other loves are expressed. 

First, Vance suggests that his list of loves is a “Christian concept” even though he does not begin with a love for the Triune God. While that is problematic in a number of respects, leaving love of God off the list is like losing the largest Russian nesting doll of the set. In Gibsonian terms, what is lost in leaving out the “largest unit” is a set of possibilities that this level affords—how considering the world via this largest unit changes our perception of what can be done within the rest of the environment. As Gibson notes, we “can describe the events of the environment at various levels,” ignoring a level leaves us with an incomplete description.

Second, on a political level, Vance’s sequential description is problematic because it leaves open the question of transitions between one love and the next. When have I loved my family sufficient that I can move on to love my neighbor? Will I ever get to the point that I can “focus on and prioritize the rest of the world”? Vance’s statement is skewed because there is no upper-level love providing the shell and shape to which the other loves must conform. Again, without the largest Russian nesting doll of the set as the immersive pattern for the smaller dolls, the progressively smaller loves of family, neighbor, country, etc., will almost certainly conform to some other unstated love—a deep ideological commitment decoupled from the guidance and restraints of the Triune God.

Having considered the negative example, how might we construe the positive account? How does Gibson’s notion of nesting help us clarify how the love of God informs and transforms all of our other loves? First, Gibson’s notion of nesting is paired with the idea of “affordances.” Every environment offers a set of “possibilities or opportunities” that are “invariable.” The affordances are there whether we recognize them or not. When we recognize that all other loves are nested in our love of God, new affordances will become evident to us. The love of God becomes the “biggest unit” outside of which all other loves are intelligible. Separating our other loves from the love of God does not mean we cannot love, but it does limit how we are able to love. The love of God opens up possibilities to love that are beyond anything we could ever ask or think. 

Second, nesting reflects the immersive nature of God’s love. Our other loves are not isolated from the love of God, but embedded within it. As Augustine notes, “no part of our life is to be unoccupied, and to afford room, as it were, for the wish to enjoy some other object, but that whatever else may suggest itself to us as an object worthy of love is to be borne into the same channel in which the whole current of our affection flows.” 

Finally, nesting maintains the distinctions between our various loves, preserving a hierarchy while resisting prioritization. Nesting is a relational concept, but it doesn’t collapse every love together. Loving God is distinct, but it is not isolated. We may say the same about all of our other loves. Like Gibson’s units, which are “full of transitions and overlaps,” our loves have blurry boundaries. Unqualified loyalty to God shapes our other loves. Like the smaller Russian nesting dolls, they are shaped to fit within and resemble our love of God.

Rightly ordered love conforms to the love of God. Devoting ourselves fully to the Lord changes the nature of the rest of our loves. Love of God makes it possible for us to love others in ways that would otherwise escape us. As we reorder our love so that all of our other loves are nested within our love of God, our disposition shifts. Uncompromising and unqualified allegiance to the Lord becomes crucial to our sense of the way the world works. Made tangible by obedience, our love for God demonstrates our devotion to the Lord, but spills over into love of neighbor. 

For instance, the command to practice Sabbath in Deuteronomy is often construed as humanitarian—as motivated by a concern for male and female servants who are to be allowed to rest on the Sabbath alongside the Israelites (Deut 5:14). This way of framing the command is not quite right. The Sabbath is an act of obedience (5:12). It is a Sabbath “to the Lord your God” (5:14). The command is fundamentally theological—it is a means of honoring God by recognizing that ceaseless labor that precludes worship of God has been left behind in Egypt (5:15). As such, the Sabbath would be unintelligible and unreflective of the Triune God’s character if the Israelites took a break while their livestock and servants continued to work. The “humanitarian” aspect of the command emerges from the theological aspect. Our love of neighbor, country, family, and even enemy are all nested within the love of God. This ordering is intrinsic to the way the world works.

Paying Attention and Fearing the Lord 
Several years ago, my family and I had the opportunity to visit the Grand Canyon. If I’m being honest, I was expecting to be unimpressed. It is just a big hole, right? Wrong. The Grand Canyon was an impressive sight to see. Looking out across this natural wonder, it was impossible not to feel a sense of awe and a deep respect for the danger the it posed. I wasn’t going to start a game of tag with the kids on the canyon’s edge. 

I had a similar experience at the Cliffs of Moher in Western Ireland. People of a certain age might recognize the Cliffs as the “Cliffs of Insanity” from The Princess Bride (1987). The Cliffs themselves are imposing, with a sharp drop-off and sheer cliff face. The rough waters of the Atlantic Ocean add to the sight’s beauty and drama. With no guardrail on the edge of the Cliffs, it isn’t uncommon to see people belly crawling to look over the side. Only the boldest—or most foolish—of visitors walks to the edge, particularly after multiple warnings not to take selfies near the cliff’s edge. Like the Grand Canyon, the Cliffs of Moher inspire a mix of awe and respect.

After visiting these two sites, I’ve come to have a deeper understanding of what it means to fear the Lord. God is, at the same time, the beautiful site you never want to look away from and the dangerous Other whose presence demands our respect. The fear of the Lord is a disposition—a sense of how the world works—that recognizes God as infinitely more relevant than any other actor or factor we may encounter. It isn’t about terror. It’s about attention. To attend to God rightly is already to place oneself under his authority.

In discussing attention, philosopher and neuroscientist Iain McGilchrist notes, “Attention changes the world. How you attend to it changes what it is you find there…[Attention] is the manner in which our consciousness is disposed towards whatever else exists. The choice we make of how we dispose our consciousness is the ultimate creative act: it renders the world what it is. It is therefore, a moral act: it has consequences.” McGilchrist doesn’t go quite far enough. Attention is more than a “moral act”—it is a theological act. When we fear the Lord, we attend to God, seeing him as infinitely relevant to all we are and all we do. Fearing the Lord orients us to God. It reflects our disposition—our sense of the way the world works.  

This understanding of the fear of the Lord is illustrated by Saul’s reign in the book of Samuel. After his installation as king, Saul makes two critical missteps. The first misstep comes as Saul is faced with a Philistine threat at Gilgal. Saul and the Israelite army were outmatched, with some of the people fleeing to Gad and Gilead while those who remained “followed him trembling” (1 Sam 13:7). After waiting for Samuel to arise as he was instructed, Saul sees that he is losing his army (13:8). In an attempt to keep the people with him, Saul decides not to wait for Samuel and offers the burnt offering that should only have been offered by Samuel (13:10-11). 

The second misstep comes after Saul’s successful campaign against the Amalekites. God commands Saul not to spare any of the Amalekites or their livestock (15:3). After defeating the Amalekites, however, Saul spares Agag, the Amalekite king, along with “the best of the sheep and of the oxen and of the fattened calves and the lambs, and all that was good” (15:9). Though Saul later claims that the livestock was spared as a sacrifice to the Lord (15:15), he eventually admits that he chose to ignore the Lord’s commands because he “feared the people and obeyed their voice” (15:24). He does not fear the Lord, but the people.

Saul’s unwillingness to obey the Lord when obedience doesn’t appear to be the most effective strategy reflects his basic disposition—Saul treats God as supplemental. God can help win the battle so long as there is a big enough army. Samuel’s response to Saul highlights the underlying problem: Saul will be rejected as king because he refuses to keep the Lord’s command (13:13-14). Saul does not fear the Lord, but the people (15:24). In his mind, the world works when he has a large, loyal army at his back. God needs to be acknowledged, but honoring and obeying him are not, in Saul’s mind, how the world works. 

These events are set in relief against Samuel’s instructions to Israel. Looking for some relief from the cycle of unpredictable leadership, the people request a king (8:1-9). Though God grants their request (8:19-22), Samuel reminds Israel that the governing dynamics of the world—the way the world works—won’t change with the shift in political structure. Israel should not assume that the king has somehow displaced God or changed their obligations to obey him. Instead, they are to fear the Lord (12:14-15; cf. Deut 6:1-2; 17:18-20). They are to live in the recognition that honoring God makes the world work.

The fear of the Lord works itself out through our actions. Abraham, for instance, shows himself to be one who fears the Lord through his willingness to sacrifice Isaac (Gen 22:12). The fear of the Lord is often connected with action (Exod 9:20-21; Deut 31:12; Ps 128:1; cf. Ps 19:9; 111:7-10) or a love for God’s commandments (Ps 112:1; cf. Ps 19:9; 34:11-14; 36:1). The fear of the Lord is made evident through action—the tangible, visible, persistent ways we make clear our sense of how the world works. 

The fear of the Lord is also described as “the beginning of wisdom” (Ps 111:10; Prov 9:10) or “knowledge” (Prov 1:7), whereas the hatred of knowledge (Prov 1:29) and evil (2:5; cf. 8:13) are associated with the absence of the fear of the Lord. Wisdom—the character and capacity to respond to God within various situation rather than responding as if God were absent—is evidenced by our actions. Knowledge is a closely related concept, particularly in Proverbs, where it “signifies that one must internalize wisdom’s virtues.” When we reorient our attention—when we fear the Lord—we become consistently aware of God’s presence. Like standing on the edge of the Grand Canyon, attending to God’s presence is a necessary precursor to right action. If we do not attend to God, we will inevitably end up responding to something else. 

Responding to God
The average weight of an NFL lineman today is over 315 pounds, whereas male ballet dancers tend to stay below 200 pounds. While both linemen and ballet dancers require a mix of flexibility, speed, coordination, and strength, their respective disciplines determine the extent and mix of those features. To be successful in one area requires a different sort of training and nutrition than the other. The habitus of an NFL lineman is different from that of a ballet dancer. To be successful, they have to do different things and adopt a different mentality. So what is habitus?

Habitus, as I am using the term, refers to the patterns of action we develop within a given social space due to the constraints imposed by that social space. That’s a bit of a mouthful, so let’s break it down a bit. Habitus develops within a given social arena—or field—in which certain strategies and attitudes are going to be more effective than others. Our ballet dancer can’t eat like an NFL lineman because carrying extra weight is going to be detrimental to a ballet dancer in ways that it isn’t for a lineman. The mix of activities necessary to be successful is specific to a given social space. Habitus involves a relatively consistent, durable, and active way of engaging with our environment.

In thinking about habitus, we are not thinking about a set of behaviorally conditions habits. Habitus does not imply a loss of individual agency. The environment is influential, but it does not eliminate our obligation to act responsibly. Instead, we are thinking about intuitive action and intentional practices matched to a given environment. 

Intuitive action emerges from experience. It isn’t something we have to rethink. For instance, psychologist Gary Klein suggests, “Because our experience enables us to recognize what to do, we can therefore make decisions rapidly and without conscious awareness or effort. We don’t have to deliberately think through issues in order to arrive at good decisions.” Intentional practices are those that we engage in deliberately—they are not as emergent as intuitive action and require us to make an effort of some sort. Both are part of habitus—the patterns of action we develop within a given social space—though they reflect different types of response emerging from and developed during a cycle of learning and experience. 

So how might Christians learn to respond differently to our environment? We need to recognize that God is the sociological actor. He is the preeminent, personal presence within every environment we could possibly occupy. Because he is preeminent—surpassing any other actor or factor or combination of actors or factors—God is not one option among many to which we might respond, but the option to whom we must always respond. Because he is always present, there is no situation in which we should act as if God were absent. While there are plenty of other reasons to respond to God—he is benevolent, holy, wise, etc.—his preeminence and presence underscore his role as a sociological actor who cannot be ignored.

Once we recognize that God is the preeminent, personal presence in our lives, becoming responsive to God involves engaging in intentional spiritual practices, trusting God through specific acts of obedience, reflecting on our experience with God, embedding ourselves within a community of fellow believers, deepening understanding and delight in God’s word, and a host of other activities. These activities—and many others—are all ways in which we respond to God. However, as we respond to God, our Christian habitus—the patterns of action we exercise under Christ’s authority—is increasingly refined.

The linkage between experience or practice and spiritual growth is found at various points in Scripture. In the Old Testament, for instance, Deuteronomy looks back to the wilderness period, during which the Israelites were to learn that “man does not live on bread alone, but lives by every word that comes from the mouth of the Lord” (8:3). Proverbs 4:18 suggests a growth in righteousness that occurs as the righteous one walks his or her path. Even David, who points back to his experience of God as a shepherd when preparing to face Goliath, has been forged for a given moment by experience (1 Sam 17:34-37).

In the New Testament, the author of Hebrews contrasts those who have become infants with those who are mature. The passage speaks to a regression of some within the community who cannot handle “solid food” but instead require milk. This regression is problematic because “everyone who lives on milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, since he is a child” (5:13). There is a state in which Christians have not developed the ability to discern right from wrong—they are incapable of intuitive or intentional action reflecting a deep understanding of righteousness. 

By contrast, the “adults” have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish good from evil because of their mature condition achieved through experience, training, and practice (5:14). The mature state results from practice and training, enabling those who have reached maturity to discern good and evil. A similar dynamic is expressed in Hebrews 12:11 in which discipline brings forth a mature state—one that “yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it [discipline].”

The way we live our lives must draw us toward a mature condition. Reaching that mature state, we are then capable of discerning good and evil. Achieving that mature state is the result of experiences like God’s discipline (Heb 12:11), humbling (Deut 8:3), provision (1 Sam 17:34-37), and walking in righteousness (Prov 4:18). Of course, we cannot discount the work of the Holy Spirit throughout the process. It is the Spirit who empowers us to live out patterns reflective of God’s order. The Spirit’s empowering work is not given so that we may do as we please, but to live within the constraints and according to the patterns of life established by God (Exod 31:1-11; Ps 119:32; Ezek 36:26-27). 

Why This Matters
God’s people are uniquely capable of proclaiming and embodying theological reality in word and deed within our fallen physical and digital world. If God’s people abandon their theological disposition when interacting on digital platforms, they rob the world of a crucial witness to Jesus Christ. The world needs a visible, tangible account of what life with God looks like under digital conditions.

Digital environments often reinforce a disordering of loves. They refocus our attention on anything other than God. They train us to respond to influencers, gas lighters, and half-truth tellers rather than responding to the Triune God. If Christians do not provide an alternative within the digital world, digital environments will normalize a non-theological disposition in which efficiency replaces faithfulness, popularity replaces wisdom, and humanity and its technological prowess replaces God.

Christians refuse these replacements by offering a faithful, embodied testimony to the active presence of God. To do so, Christians love God without qualification, attend to God without distraction, and respond in obedience even if doing so does not seem to solve the problem at hand. Christians make theological reality visible. They demonstrate that life does not depend on constant connectivity, increasing followers, or mobilizing outraged citizens. They offer the world a glimpse of a different sort of life.

If Christians fail to cultivate and live out a theological disposition, the loss is personal, ecclesial, and cultural. The digital world will continue to advance a narrative that denies and distorts reality, particularly the reality of the Triune God. It will reinforce a narrative counter to that of the Scripture about what it means to be human, what deserves our attention, and how to respond to pressure and uncertainty. Developing a theological disposition matters because Christians are called to live under the authority of Christ and call others to do the same (Matt 28:16-20). 

Conclusion
Our sense of the way the world works—our disposition—is crucial to navigating an information-rich digital environment. But how? As we develop a theological disposition, we begin to recognize that much of the information we consume either lacks a theological dimension or advances false theological claims. If we are careful consumers of information, we will often find that what we consume encourages us to love the world on the world’s terms, to fear someone or something other than God, or to respond to an issue or situation rather than responding to the Triune God. Even when the information we consume does not call us to some explicit action, news stories, political commentaries, opinion pieces, academic essays, and social media posts of various sorts encourage us to set aside our understanding of the world in favor of strategies for managing or manipulating it.

Our theological disposition should not prompt us to isolate ourselves from the world or to assume that any media we consume is necessarily untrue; rather, it should remind us that even truth can be pressed into the service of a counterfeit reality. Our sense of the way the world works helps us distinguish truth from the phony narratives in which truth is embedded. While we must certainly identify false statements, it is crucial that we develop a capacity for nuance that will guard us from missing the theological complexity of the world—physical and digital—that we inhabit.   

