INTRODUCTION: DISCERNMENT IN THE DIGITAL AGE  

I got my first taste of digital drama in 2018. I had been hired as the academic dean of a school that was beginning to face significant budgetary challenges. After a couple of years of discontinuing programs, informing faculty that their contracts would not be renewed, and closing down a branch campus, a self-proclaimed whistleblower accused certain faculty members and administrators, among other things, of denying the doctrine of inerrancy. The accusations were unfounded and crippling. 

As the news of our supposed doctrinal problems went public, some high-profile evangelicals who had dealt with the inerrancy issue in the past weighed in on the situation despite having no real knowledge of what was happening. Parallels were drawn between our institution and those that had gone liberal in the past. There was no room for nuance, discussion, or explanation. The narrative began to overshadow reality. I didn’t yet have the language for what was happening, but I was watching a plausible digital narrative replace reality itself. A map was becoming the terrain. 

Those reporting on the situation seemed comfortable working with incomplete information. The investigative journalists seemed content to speak only with those who would reinforce the narrative about doctrinal drift. Anyone who attempted to offer a different perspective was presented as part of the problem. 

Working to reinforce the narrative they had already advanced, elements of the story were omitted. No reporter, for instance, mentioned the whistleblower’s track record of requesting that students in an introductory doctrinal course be reprimanded or expelled because they were not articulating the doctrine of inerrancy correctly in their discussion board posts and papers. Reports neglected to note that the particular instance the whistleblower cited as “proof” of doctrinal drift occurred during the discussion of an academic paper dealing with postmodern perspectives on truth in a theology department meeting. There was never any mention of the individual conversations clarifying the position of specific faculty members after the whistleblower had raised his concerns during the meeting. 

Once the journalists shaped their narrative everything that reinforced it became relevant and anything that didn’t wasn’t worth finding. For the story about an evil institution and its mustache-twisting leadership to work, it had to be drained of any sort of complexity. A plausible, though highly selective, story had reframed reality. The end result: we had to spend a lot of time solving a problem we didn’t actually have, people’s reputations were tarnished if not ruined, and careers were ended. In the end, I’m not suggesting that there was nothing wrong at my former institution. I can understand, particularly in retrospect, how those who made the accusations formed their perspectives. I don’t agree, but I understand. 

What I didn’t anticipate at the time was how the situation would tempt me to engage in the same sort of dynamics I was critiquing. I wanted to respond publicly. I wanted to correct the record, name names, and defend myself and my colleagues. I began writing blog posts and articles that I planned to post and submit for publication. Thankfully, I have an even-tempered wife. For about six months after the incident died down, my wife would read my work and tell me I couldn’t post it because it wasn’t well-reasoned. It was angry. 

I’m grateful for her judgment. I would have regretted posting what I wrote. Even if what I’d written was factually correct, the work’s tone and the posture I’d adopted in writing it were all wrong. I was playing into a digital world that too often rewards bickering, scandal, and outrage. What was needed was calm, thoughtful, theological discussion. That realization helped clarify the underlying dynamics of the problem. 

The point is not to oppose investigative journalism or to name the exposure of inappropriate, sinful behavior within institutions. Accountability is crucial within the body of Christ. While I believe we need to avoid asymmetries in accountability so that, for instance, journalists are not simply allowed to report stories that end up being false without repercussion, there is little doubt that investigative journalists are often essential to bringing corruption to light. We can’t throw out the whole profession simply because journalists don’t get things exactly right every time. The danger, especially in a digital environment, is not that concern gives way to critique, but that critique results in closure. Complexity becomes inconvenient and reality must conform to the story already told. 

I am, however, concerned at the ease with which truth can be shaped to serve a given agenda. What I experience doesn’t seem to be an anomaly. Our digital world tends to reward exaggerated responses and emotive content that values speed over accuracy and innuendo over certainty. Digital drama isn’t limited to higher education, big business, or even organizational work. It isn’t even limited to the creation of a false narrative. My experience is just one expression of the sort of difficulties any and all of us may face in a digital world that makes it easy to distort reality. As technological tools expand, we may find ourselves looking back to the days of autonomous blog posts and pithy tweets. Though it isn’t all bad, artificial intelligence is introducing new ways to propagate confusion in the world. 

Catfishing scandals deceive using fake personas. Deepfakes allow bad actors to put the voice and/or appearance of a real person into sexual situations. “Innovative” entrepreneurs and companies are clipping and doctoring actual video and audio content to make it appear that an expert or celebrity is endorsing a product or service making it more likely that consumers will make a purchase. AI systems that become aware of their potential removal take drastic measures—including blackmail—to ensure self-preservation. Even more innocent uses of A.I. platforms can result in fake citations, skewed statistics, and “hallucinations,” resulting in skewed understandings of reality.

All of this (and more!) means that even the most casual internet users will be susceptible to fakes, phonies, and falsehoods that distort reality for nefarious purposes—I mean, who hasn’t received the email from a Nigerian prince. 

Beyond the intentionally deceptive content, we can also experience the internet’s version of friendly fire as well-meaning people share false information online. Due in part to the need for traditional news outlets to put out more information at a faster pace, we are now left without established, trusted institutions doing the hard, investigative work needed to provide the best version of the truth possible. These and other dynamics have eroded some of the safeguards that previously alerted us to falsehood and pointed us toward reality. 

While we might be tempted to throw up our hands and begin a campaign to shut down the internet, it seems unlikely that such radical steps would be effective (or necessary). Adopting an overly suspicious posture that assumes we can’t believe anything we read isn’t the answer though not believing everything we read isn’t a bad idea. Instead, we need to recognize the relatively unchecked power the internet provides for all of us to advance a particular presentation of reality—a map that claims to represent the territory it describes accurately. Let me break that down a bit. This power shows up in at least three ways.

First, we have relatively unchecked power. We need to reckon with what we can do now that we couldn’t do before and how that gives us opportunities to amplify or diminish our witness to Christ. There are no doubt times when using the power offered by the digital world has exposed bad actors, inspired God’s people to action, and allowed the gospel to be proclaimed. That same power, however, can just as easily fracture Christ’s body. Our relative autonomy to post and promote what we like can harm the church by creating divisions, spreading gossip, and venerating or vilifying a member of Christ’s body rather than pointing to Christ. Because technology amplifies human capacities, the relatively unchecked power of the digital world will allow us to produce good and evil at scale.    

Second, all of us have this unchecked power. We aren’t merely susceptible to tech geniuses, uber-rich entrepreneurs, powerful politicians, or influential institutions (though they are still problems) but to anyone with an internet-connected device. If I wanted, I could start my very own physics blog explaining quantum mechanics and providing tutorials on calculus. It doesn’t matter that I don’t know what most of those words mean—I can still start the blog, call myself a physicist, and, if I’m good at it, delude others into thinking that I know what I’m talking about. Get on the right platform and my relatively uninformed theories might gain traction or, at the very least, become newsworthy. The enduring interest in actor Terrance Howard’s mathematical theories or the flippant claims of politicians provide helpful examples. While there are informed people creating and distributing content on the internet, the fact that all of us can do pretty much whatever we want online opens all of us up to those who might exaggerate or misrepresent their own expertise. In a digital age, sincerity and confidence can be mistaken for authority.

This phenomenon is something different than we’ve had in the past. Newspapers, broadcast television and radio, book publishers, and other forms of media used to filter information to fit the relatively limited space available for content. Editors and producers made choices for us because they couldn’t publish everything. In the digital age, however, space and time are inconsequential. Editors and producers aren’t necessary for platforms like YouTube, Sub Stack, TikTok, or Facebook. Without the limitations of space and time, everyone can create content whether that content is well-informed or not. Because we’ve lost the traditional gatekeepers, we have to sift and sort the information we consume on our own.
 
Third, we can advance a particular presentation of reality. We aren’t changing the world when we describe it, but we are shaping the way we and others perceive it. Presenting reality, as we will see throughout this book, is challenging because all such presentations are incomplete. They are not false simply because they are partial, but they contribute to falsehood by claiming to be complete. When we pretend that our presentations are more complete than they actually are, we create artificial boundaries that diminish and marginalize the perspectives of others. I am not advocating for an “anything goes” mentality or for the relativity of truth. We should, however, exercise appropriate intellectual humility when presenting reality. We need to recognize that our understanding of the world is always partial and incremental. 

For instance, when I was a kid, my town always had a Halloween parade. My parents would take me to stand along the street waiting for those on the parade floats to throw candy my way. We would see each float in succession. We saw the whole parade, but only from one side and only as it passed by us. Had we been in a blimp, we would have seen the whole parade at once, but only from above (and without having a shot at the candy). No one at the parade could claim to have seen every aspect of the parade. No one can see every float from every angle from beginning to end. We always miss something. 

This way of thinking about perspective doesn’t ensure a faithful representation of reality. Those watching the parade from roughly the same perspective have the opportunity to see similar parts of the parade. If there is a creepy clown juggling jack-o-lanterns on the float, two people standing in similar positions should describe the same thing. Unfortunately, evaluating presentations of reality is seldom as straightforward as spotting the creepy clown. Yet, as striking as such an image might seem, people don’t always see the same thing in the same way. Even if they do, some people just don’t tell the truth. Being discerning in a digital age involves evaluating how or if a given presentation contributes to or distorts our understanding of the world.

Our limited perspective is not a defect, but a normal feature of our creaturely existence. Human knowledge is situated and temporal. Problems arise not because our knowledge is partial, but because we forget that our limitations should point us toward dependence on God. Discernment begins not with skepticism toward others, but with a sober recognition of our own finitude expressed by a posture of reverent dependence that orders our thinking, judgments, and actions (Job 28:28; Ps 111:10; Prov 1:7; 9:10).

We cannot assume that everyone is attempting to present reality, particularly the reality of the Triune God, faithfully. In fact, we should admit that the opposite is often true. We have entered a digital world that can and is shaping our perceptions of events, people, and the world, yet is not constrained or governed by God’s word. While the digital world holds a great deal of promise for those seeking to participate in the mission of God, we cannot deny the challenges it poses. We must double-down on discipleship and discernment in this digital world. 

Christians need to ensure that we present reality in theological perspective. We need to tell stories that not only assume God’s existence but also acknowledge that the Triune God is infinitely more relevant than any other actor or factor. I am not suggesting that every piece of content has to mention God or include a reading of a doctrinal position. The biblical book of Esther, after all, doesn’t include the word “God” even though the story makes clear that He is active and present in the lives of his people. Instead, I am suggesting that our presentations of reality reflect our Christian convictions about God and the patterns of life he cultivates in us through the Holy Spirit. 

What’s At Stake and Why Does It Matter?
So, what’s at stake? The simple answer: our sanity. Perhaps it would be enough to stop there. Our sanity is pretty important. Yet, there is more at stake because we, as Christians, exist to point others to the reality of the Triune God. Embracing illusions puts our witness at risk. As we enter the information age, we aren’t just in danger of thinking wrong thoughts or developing mental health problems though neither of these problems is trivial. We are at risk of learning to embody a pseudo-reality that calls us to reorder our loves, reorient our attention, and respond to the call of the world rather than the voice of God. We are in danger of living as if the Triune God doesn’t exist or, perhaps worse, doesn’t matter. 

Given what’s at stake, we begin to understand why it matters. It matters because digital distortion doesn’t remain digital. It isn’t walled off from the rest of our existence. It invades the whole of our lives changing the ways we interact with God, one another, and the world. It matters because attention is a theological act that orients us to the Triune God or positions us to ignore him. Digital distortions have the capacity to redirect our attention skewing our affections, altering our conception of time, making the trivial seem significant, and diminishing our resolve to be a faithful presence in the world. 

Our personal encounters with digital distortion can influence our hearts, minds, and behaviors. They can influence those we love. I’m a Christian, husband, parent, leader, and theologian. As a Christian, I have a duty to behave in a way that will honor God rather than causing him or his teachings to be reviled (1 Tim 6:1; Tit 2:5). I also have an impulse to prepare and protect those in my life from the negative consequences created by digital rage baiters, fraudsters, pseudo-journalists, false teachers, and reality counterfeiters. These convictions have shaped the way I try to live and lead in a digital world. That impulse has manifested itself in at least four ways. 

First, it has shaped the sort of content I’m willing to create, as well as the posture I’ve adopted for my writing, podcasting, and online presence more generally. I’m not shy about posting content that interrogates and critiques an idea, but I seldom position my content in opposition to a specific author. I try, as much as possible, to avoid the perception that I’m demonizing the author instead of criticizing a position or theory. I often avoid mentioning other authors or content creators unless I feel I have sufficient space to do justice to their positions. 

This approach is informed by a posture I describe as calm, thoughtful, and theological. My aim in creating content and conducting interviews is to be “quick to ‘hear, slow to speak, slow to anger” (Jam 1:19). The internet tends to encourage us to invert James’s advice so that we are quick to speak and anger, but slow to listen. We need to resist that tendency.

Second, my protective impulse has prompted me to encourage others to get comfortable with not knowing everything. For instance, when I’ve taught Genesis at the collegiate level, students often ask questions about creation and evolution. While I know the biblical text and can speak to its theology, I know virtually nothing about geology, carbon dating, astrophysics, and the like. I’m honest about that and don’t attempt to teach on it. 

Though I’ve taught Genesis multiple times, I have never felt the urge to master scientific disciplines to fill in my knowledge gap. Once we accept the idea that we don’t need to know everything, we no longer need to fall into the cycle of incessant content consumption. We can choose topics that we want to understand more deeply, engage in research, and follow conversations closely. We free ourselves of the pressure to be “in the know” about every topic. 

Third, it has prompted me to think about how I can help those around me identify distorted realities that displace the Triune God from his proper place in our lives. While total avoidance is often an appropriate tactic in dealing with deformative content like internet pornography, it isn’t always a realistic or even helpful strategy when it comes to artificial intelligence, social media, and internet use more generally. 

As such, I’ve sought to help others develop the dispositions, knowledge, and skills to be discerning. Christians have always needed discernment to live as disciples—as those committed to learning to sit under Christ’s authority (Matt 28:16-20). Yet, the need for individual discernment has become more evident as the institutions that once helped hold back the flood of information have been displaced by the world wide web.  

Fourth, it has prompted me to preserve significant space for non-digital activities even when those activities may be inconvenient. My wife and I decided pretty early on that we were going to limit our kids’ exposure to social media opting to encourage more physical activities. Even within my own family, making room for “analog” activities has happened in different ways. My son was always a bit of a “tinkerer” taking things apart, trying his hand at locksmithing, building his own computer, and working on our old Wrangler. My daughters pursued athletics. We regularly lift weights together spending time in the gym benching, squatting, and deadlifting. There isn’t a template for detaching from the digital world. While my kids have phones and social media accounts, they aren’t obsessed with them—their other interests keep them tethered to the physical world God has given us. 

Professionally, working remotely creates certain challenges for non-digital interactions. Zoom meetings and phone calls provide a connection different from emails and texts. I’ve also committed not to use artificial intelligence to do things like writing emails. While I do use AI in a variety of other ways, I don’t like the idea of outsourcing my interactions with others. I don’t want to dishonor them by denying them my time and attention. Preserving human-to-human interaction—even when it is mediated digitally—seems to be a good rule of thumb.

Living in a digital age requires us to make choices about what content we consume and produce, as well as how we consume and produce it. We can’t assume that there are no trade-offs in allowing AI to write a sermon or getting our news from social media influencers. We can’t assume that commenting on situations we don’t really understand on social media is going to advance the gospel. The integrity and testimony of God’s people is at stake. We have to learn to discern well in a digital age. But how?

What Do We Do?
Since we understand what’s at stake and why it matters, we are left with a simple question: what do we do? In part, we need to think redemptively about the ways our practices have been deformed without jumping to the conclusion that we must abandon the practices themselves. Throwing the proverbial baby out with the bathwater shouldn’t be our default response. Jesus himself gives us a framework for renovating our practices theologically rather than abandoning them. 

Jesus models this sort of approach in Matthew 6 as he teaches his disciples about giving, prayer, and fasting. He contrasts the way the hypocrites and Gentiles give, pray, and fast to the way the disciples are to give, pray, and fast. He doesn’t call his disciples to abandon the practices but to give, pray, and fast in light of the character and activity of God. Whereas the hypocrites fast (6:16) and give to the poor (6:2) to enhance their own social standing, the disciples are to give and fast knowing that “your Father who sees in secret will reward you” (Matt 6:4; cf. 6:17-18). 

Similarly, while the hypocrites pray to demonstrate their piety and benefit from the social standing it accrues, the disciples are to pray in secret—not as a show intended to elevate them in their social circles but as a humble practice of submitting to God’s will. Jesus also suggests that the many words of the Gentile prayers were unnecessary for the disciples whose “Father knows what you need before you ask him” (6:8). Jesus doesn’t condemn the practices themselves, but how and why the hypocrites and Gentiles were performing them. The disciples’ way of life is to reflect the theological conviction that God is active and present—an infinitely relevant part of reality. Jesus’s teaching is not merely about prayer, fasting, and giving. It is a pattern for discerning when our practices assume God is absent, allowing us to pursue our own agendas and interests. The issue is not always the practice itself, but the theological reality the practice assumes and conveys.

Like Jesus, we need to look beyond what is being practiced considering how and why people are engaging in the practice. Using fasting for weight loss is quite different than fasting as a spiritual discipline. Praying to relieve stress isn’t the same as praying to build a relationship with the Lord. Though certain aspects of the practice will look similar, they can reinforce a distorted view of reality in which God is decentered and, thus, denied his proper position as Sovereign. 

By contrasting the world’s practices with those of the church, we will see the differences between church and world more clearly—we will begin to discover our uniquely theological disposition. Our disposition is our sense of how the world works. It helps us relate rightly to God, others, and the whole of creation. A theological disposition orients us toward obedience (Deut 30:19-20; Isa 33:5-6) recognizing that we are not responsible for fixing the world but for living faithfully in a world so broken only God can fix it. Living faithfully is not an excuse for passivity or inactivity but an acknowledgement that we are to respond to God from within the world rather than responding to the world as if God is impotent, disinterested, or absent.
 
Our patterns of life emerge from our theological disposition. These patterns differentiate us from the world. Our aim is not simply to be different from the world, but different in the right ways—in ways that root our lives in the reality of the Triune God. We seek to live with the grain of reality acknowledging the claim God has on our lives. We seek to live faithfully even if living faithfully results in near-term suffering. 

If our sense of how the world works distorts or denies God, the patterns that emerge won’t look like Christ. At best, patterns rooted in a reality that distorts or denies God can cultivate wholesomeness but not holiness. To be faithful witnesses in a digital world, we must learn to live in light of the reality of Jesus Christ—as disciples discerning how to follow “the way, the truth, and the life” (Jn 14:6).

Dispositions and patterns of life allow us to orient ourselves toward the reality of God’s active presence. To develop and maintain these patterns in a digital age, we will need some specific tactics. These tactics will not only help us distinguish between true and false but between phony and authentic. They will help us recognize incomplete stories and cultivate a sanctified curiosity that pursues a more complete understanding. These tactics will help us think through the often-unstated commitments and agendas that accompany the world’s practices. They will also inform our witness as we engage the world critically yet charitably respecting others while pointing them beyond distorted and limited perspectives to the reality of the Triune God.

Conclusion
Ever since the serpent in the garden convinced the woman that her paradise was a prison, humans have been confronted by stories that deny and distort God. Discipleship—learning to live under the authority of the Triune God—and discernment—the ability to live wisely and to distinguish good from evil—have always been necessary. The digital world has not created a new problem. It has amplified an old one. Bad actors and well-meaning individuals alike can now promote distorted perspectives of reality and frame incomplete stories as if they are complete. As Christians navigate the digital age, we need to recognize that we will often be part of the problem. We are not simply defending against outside forces that seek to diminish and deny the Triune God, but against our own tendencies to react and respond in ways that might cause God’s name to be reviled (1 Tim 6:1; Tit 2:5; cf. 1 Pet 2:12). 

Discipleship and discernment in the digital age requires more of us. As individual members of the body of Christ and as the body of Christ as a whole, we have the responsibility to proclaim ‘Jesus is Lord’ in both word and deed. Much of our engagement now happens in relatively isolated moments. We scroll, post, and comment alone. Though some of us may benefit from ongoing accountability from local congregations and Christian friends, we take on a greater duty as individual Christians to evaluate sources carefully, reserve judgment when understanding is limited, seek perspectives beyond our own, refrain from spreading gossip, half-baked stories, or outright lies, and remain rooted in our faith communities to cultivate theological reflection within the bounds of shared Christian conviction. Faithful witness in a digital world will not come from mastering every new technology, but from learning to live under the authority of Christ by speaking boldly while exercising restraint, responding to God rather than reacting to situations, and focusing on glorifying God rather than attempting to change the world.


