Human Capacity and Technology

Introduction
My wife and I have moved nine times since 1999 including seven times after having our oldest child—a son—in 2005. At one point, we were living in my hometown of Carlinville in Central Illinois. Carlinville is a small town of around 5,500 people. When my wife and I took our son out for walks, we could let him run ahead of us to the next intersection without worrying about traffic or other pedestrians. On the relatively quiet streets of Carlinville, he could run ahead of us without being in any danger. 

When he was going into the second grade, my wife and I moved our family to downtown Chicago. We bought a place close to Wrigley Field on Chicago’s north side. One weekend we headed down to Michigan Avenue to see the sights. My son tried to run ahead of me like he’d done in Carlinville. But the crowded walkways of Michigan Avenue weren’t as easy to navigate as the uncrowded sidewalks of Carlinville, Illinois. There are more people, more traffic, and more potential for problems.

I watched as my son was bumped by walkers who didn’t notice the little boy near their feet. He hugged walls, dodged those texting while walking, and slipped into doorways to avoid being stepped on. He wasn’t able to take a straight path down the street. Not wanting him to get too frustrated or hurt, I called him back to walk with me. 

At the time, I was a six-foot tall, relatively muscular 250 pounds. I didn’t have the same issues as my son when I walked down the crowded street. People saw me coming. I wasn’t shoving other pedestrians out of the way, but I wasn’t dodging everyone either. When my son walked with me, he could walk like he was six-foot, 250 pounds even though he wasn’t. He could walk differently because he walked with me.

My son’s stature hadn’t changed. He was still the same height and weight. He still didn’t have a commanding presence while walking down Michigan Avenue. Nothing about him had changed except for his position—he was no longer “on his own” but was next to me. That position—the change in relationship—made a significant difference in his experience walking down a busy Chicago sidewalk. 

This story illustrates a physical context’s influence on capacity. My son could walk, but his capacity to walk was limited by the busy streets of Chicago. In a similar way, the social, ideological, and symbolic contexts we inhabit shape our capacities and how we exercise them. Digital technology is now one of the most powerful contexts shaping and expanding what we can do. At times, it tempts us to do more than we should. These aspects of our context tend to push against a theological understanding of the world by encouraging us to believe we can live independent from God. Whatever we may be able to do apart from God, the Bible paints a picture of diminished human capacity after the Fall (Gen 3:1-7). It reminds us that human capacity is maximized when exercised in dependence on and under the authority of God (cf. 2 Cor 12:9-11). To understand human capacity in biblical perspective, we need to consider four components of Genesis 2-4: (1) God’s provision, (2) human work, (3) naming animals, and (4) human nakedness.

Human Capacity in the World Before (and After) the Fall
Genesis 2 serves as the beginning of a broader unit ending in 4:26. It offers a picture of the pre-Fall world that stands in stark contrast to the post-Fall world of Genesis 3 and 4. God’s provision, human work, the naming of the animals, and human nakedness help us interpret Genesis 2:4-4:26, as well as contributing to an understanding of human capacity.

God’s Provision
Human capacity looks different under God’s provision, protection, and authority. Genesis 2:4-25 describes the world as having “no bush of the field” and “no plant of the field because “the Lord God had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground” (2:5). Instead of rain, a “mist” watered the ground (5:6). These verses provide background information about the pre-Fall world in which humankind is created (2:7; 21-23). 

God plants a garden and places the man in it. The garden’s trees are plentiful and “good for food” (2:9). God did not expect humankind to scratch out a living. He provided for humankind so that they could “be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it” (1:28). God, creation, and humankind co-exist in harmony because humans live under God’s authority and the creation responds to their position as God’s image-bearers. Human capacity was maximized because humans lived under God’s authority. 

Human Work
Before the fall, the earth responded differently to humankind. Human work pre-Fall (Gen 2:15) differed from the pain/toil of the post-Fall world (cf. 3:17; 4:11-12). The reference to working the ground in verse 5 anticipates a different sort of work after the Fall. Instead of the painful work required to eat from the ground after the human couple sins, pre-Fall work involved tilling/serving and keeping the garden of Eden (2:15). Though the nature of this work is unclear, serving and keeping the garden was done for the good of the garden—the humans and the garden would have reciprocal relationship. 

While some have proposed that there were certain dangers beyond the garden, (1) serving the garden would likely have involved some sort of agricultural activity and (2) keeping the garden involved maintaining proper order. The potential disorder actualized after the human couple eats the forbidden fruit (2:16-17) was the threat from which humanity was to “keep” or protect the garden.

Whatever human work in the garden involved, it was different from the pain and toil necessary to grow crops in the cursed ground (Gen 3:17-19). When humanity lived under the authority of God, the garden provided for human needs as humans served it and protected it. Human dependence on God maximized human capacity by living into the order God had established. Human rebellion diminished it by thrusting humans into a disordered context.

Naming Animals
Imagine standing naked in the midst of all the animals of the world without feeling vulnerable. That picture underscores the way human capacity changes after the fall. Man’s naming of the animals has been construed as an act of dominion or as a means of allowing man to participate in the creation of “culture.” While both of these interpretations are possible, the naming of the animals reflects man’s ability to recognize the difference between himself and the rest of God’s creatures. When he sees the woman, he recognizes that she is like him and that they share an identity distinct from the rest of the animals. 

Whereas the rest of the animals leave man without the capacity to fulfill the commission to be fruitful and multiply or to exercise dominion (Gen 1:28), the woman is “bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh” (2:23). The woman is God’s gift to the man who was otherwise incapable of realizing the destiny God had assigned humanity. In naming the animals prior to seeing the woman, the man realizes that the woman is utterly unique in all creation. 

God is not bringing the animals to the man thinking he will find a partner. He brings them so that the man recognizes the woman as the “helper” who will allow humans to do what they are intended to do. Together the man and woman have the capacity to be exceedingly fruitful and exercise dominion as God’s vice regents. 

Human Nakedness
The shift from being naked and unashamed to vulnerable exposure reflects the way changes in context influence human capacity. After the woman is created, we are told that the man and woman were “naked and were not ashamed” (2:25). Commentators have often puzzled over Genesis 2:25 because nudity throughout the rest of the Hebrew Bible tends to be viewed negatively (cf. Gen 6:21; Isa 20:2, 4; 58:7; Amos 2:16; Hos 2:3; Mic 1:8). Some suggest that the reference to being naked and unashamed reflects a period of innocence or immaturity. Such an interpretation is problematic because it tends to ignore the broader dynamics of the narrative. For instance, if the author was assuming later cultural taboos, there would have been a theological problem with God placing the man and woman in the garden sanctuary naked.

It seems better not to import later conceptions of nakedness back into Genesis 2:25. The human couple’s lack of shame reflects their dependence on God at that moment. The Hebrew term bosh translated “shame” (2:25), occurs when someone has “risked something to a power…and thus undertook a daring venture.” When a risk doesn’t pay off, the one who took that risk “receives the consequences of that venture so that he must suffer the opposite of what he sought.” Because the human couple had not yet rebelled against God, their nudity wasn’t a matter of shame or vulnerability (cf. Gen 42:9,12). 

Man and woman had been naked as they exercised their God-given authority before the Creator and the rest of creation. They were serving in the garden without clothing. The man named the animals while naked. Nakedness did not limit human capacity because humanity had not yet sought to exercise dominion apart from God.

After the Fall, the human couple’s new knowledge of their nakedness is not an initial discovery but the realization that they are now vulnerable because they are naked. The man and woman use the fig leaf (3:7), which could be construed as the first technology referenced in Scripture, to cover themselves having failed in their attempt to “be like God, knowing good and evil” (3:5). The human couple’s concern for their naked state reflects the disorder human sin brings into the world and the realization that being naked in this new context is problematic.  

Prior to eating the forbidden fruit, their nudity was not a source of shame because they had risked nothing to power. They lived under God’s authority opting to be dependent on him and to enjoy his good creation. After the Fall, human nudity becomes a vulnerability cultivating fear (3:10). In recognizing their nudity, the human couple also recognizes their relative frailty and diminished capacity in the world apart from God.  

Genesis 2 provides a pre-Fall picture of the world and the way humans existed within it. The pre- and post-Fall worlds were extremely different. While humanity remained dependent on God and aligned with His order, they were able to do what God had created them to do. Their rebellion, however, resulted in a context in which humanity would struggle. Though humans remained capable, their capacity often led them away from God. Enter the builder of the city and tower at Babel. 

Human Capacity and the Tower of Babel
The Tower of Babel narrative is often framed as the result of human pride highlighting the city-builders desire to “make a name” for themselves (11:4). This pride manifests in the “tower with its top in the heavens” identified as a ziggurat and understood as an attempt to “reach God.” Though the builders’ pride may be a motivating factor in the narrative, it isn’t the reason God stops the builders. Similarly, if the tower had a religious purpose as is assumed by its identification with a ziggurat, it misrepresented God. However, it is worth noting that the tower isn’t referenced explicitly in v. 8 despite the combination of the “city and tower” in the rest of the narrative (11:4-5). The tower may have been a contributing factor to God’s displeasure, but it seems more coincidental within the narrative.

The problem in Genesis 11:1-9 involves the builders’ ability to execute their plans (11:6). Because the people can coordinate easily via a shared language (11:6) and have the technology available to create the necessary building materials (11:3), there is nothing to stop them from doing as they please (11:5). The builders’ God-given capacities are not the problem, but their use of them to pursue a path on their own terms. 

When God comes down to see the work of the builders, he does not condemn them for pride or idolatry. His concern is not directed toward their motivations, but their capacity. They can, so they will (11:6). We continue to see this dynamic in our own lives. Digital systems excel at coordination at scale, allowing us to communicate more easily through real-time translation and the ability to bridge distances with relatively little effort. They amplify reach, reduce language barriers, and make it easier for humans to act collectively. Whether such collective action has a significant effect is a different question. This concern is underscored by God’s response to the people’s project: he diminishes human capacity through the confusion of language (11:7, 9). 

Genesis 11:1-9 could certainly be construed as an anti-technology narrative. It isn’t. The brick-making technology of Babel (11:3) wasn’t the problem—the brick and bitumen simply afforded humans the opportunity to set their own course. The more basic problem is the use of that technology to pursue an agenda independent of God. Apart from God’s constraints, humans will always produce a skewed vision of God because experiencing God requires obedience.

God’s call of Abram stands in contrast to the Tower of Babel narrative. In Genesis 11:10-31, we are introduced to Abram whose family settled in Haran. Whereas the tower builders desire to settle, God calls Abram to sojourn (12:1). The builders want to make a name for themselves, but God tells Abram that he will make Abram’s name great (12:2). Abram will be a locus of blessing for “all the families of the earth” (12:3), whereas the builders seem to have a more isolated motive of not being scattered (11:4, 9).

As the “Tower of Babel” illustrates, humans were capable after the Fall. However, when those capacities are exercised apart from an understanding of God humans tend to add to disorder and work against God. As humanity exercises its capacities apart from God, incomplete understandings of the world are mistakenly thought to be complete. Like Goethe’s apprentice who wields the sorcerer’s power without a full command of it, humans often use their own capacities to manipulate the world even though they don’t fully understand it.

Technology, Human Capacity, and Scripture
Human capacity is context dependent. In part, that dependence involves answering the question “capacity for what?” The crux of the difference between the pre- and post-Fall world is humanity’s decision to pursue their own betterment rather than serving God and the rest of creation. When the man and woman ignore God’s command to become “like God, knowing good and evil” (Gen 3:5), they seek to break free of the constraints enabling them to be naked and unashamed (2:25) as they exercise dominion (1:28) and till/serve and keep the garden (2:5). The answer to “capacity for what?” is no longer “to serve God,” but “to serve ourselves.” 

So, how does all of this relate to technology? First, we need to understand what we mean by “technology.” In today’s world, we often think of various digital systems and devices as technologies. The internet, smart phones, artificial intelligence, and robots are certainly examples of a certain sort of technology, but technology encompasses more than digital devices. Clothes, forks, office buildings, roads, sewer systems, and hammers are non-digital examples of technologies. Still, technology is more than objects. 

Carl Mitcham argues that technology may be understood “as object, as knowledge, as activity, and as volition.” This fourfold distinction recognizes the skills (knowledge) that make designing, creating, and using (activity) various sorts of objects possible, as well as the aims and intentions that motivate such activities. While we can distinguish the four aspects of technology (i.e., as object, knowledge, activity, and volition), they have a practical unity.

For instance, as an object, a smartphone is a physical artifact composed of glass, metal, and circuitry. It is designed to extend our ability to communicate across distances, access information, create content, etc. But a phone is also knowledge in the sense that it requires us to develop competencies in, for example, basic digital literacy. As an activity, smartphones are not just possessions but practices like scrolling, searching, posting, texting, recording, editing, ad sharing. Finally, the phone is volition because we use the phone in a variety of ways. We seek out entertainment, take selfies, fact-check information, manage our schedules, and, occasionally, make phone calls. A single device can serve different ends depending on the knowledge and activity a user brings to it and the agendas that govern the phone’s use. 

As such, when we think about technology, we are thinking about a particular way of responding to the world. Technology involves acting on, intervening, and extending human capacity involving materials, skills, effort, and volitional aimed at improving, serving, taming, controlling, or manipulating the world in some way. Framing technology as response reflects the vulnerabilities, misdirected desires, and under-informed understandings of the world without adopting an anti-technology stance. 

What sort of guidance does the Bible offer about technology and human capacity? The Bible doesn’t address technology directly. For instance, human labor is expected prior to the Fall (Gen 2:15), but the text is silent about whether tilling and keeping the garden required technology—tools (objects) skillfully designed, created, and employed (knowledge and activity) for the purpose of caring for the garden (volitional). However, the absence of any reference to technology is not necessarily evidence of an actual or historical absence of technology prior to the Fall. Instead, the absence of technology conveyed by the nakedness of human beings (2:25), serves the narrative’s purpose by emphasizing the “rich state of affairs in which natural needs are satisfied and natural gifts fruitfully employed.” Humanity had a different experience of the world prior to the Fall. The entrance of technology in the form of fig leaves fashioned into loin coverings after the Fall underscores the immediate recognition that being naked in the post-Fall world is problematic (3:10). 

Some of you may be thinking that calling the fig leaves the first technology mentioned in scripture is a bit far-fetched. There is certainly a difference between a fig leaf loin cloth and certain modern-day devices, it may be helpful to think of a suit of armor. Armor was designed to protect soldiers in battle. It is forged from raw metal, shaped, and fitted to a particular warrior. It is easier to think of armor as a technology. The fig leaves, however inadequate, were intended as a means of covering and protecting. Certainly, shame was involved. The fig leaves were intended to provide privacy and distance between the human couple and God. The leaves were also intended to address the newfound human vulnerability. Though God seems to deem the leaves inadequate, the human’s use what they have available outside of themselves to create a device that will solve a particular problem. The fig leave loin cloths are a remedial sort of technology. 

Within the narrative the fig leaves highlight the change in context from pre-Fall to post-Fall. The technology is a response to the new context. While the loincloths (3:7; cf. 2 Sam 18:11; 1 Kgs 2:5; 2 Kgs 3:21; Isa 3:24; 23:15) are replaced by robe (3:21; cf. 37:3, 23, 31-33; Exod 28:4, 39-40), the fact that God provides a more appropriate covering after pronouncing the curses (Gen 3:15-19) should keep us from judging technology too harshly. Even God recognizes that humans are vulnerable and in need of protective coverings due to the change in context. 

We are now ready to answer the question: how does human capacity relate to technology? Given our description of technology as response involving an object, skill, activity, and/or volition, we can see the deep connection between technology and “diverse types of will, drive, motive, aspiration, intention, and choice.” Because human capacity is deficient in the context of a fallen world a, technology is intended to help us deal with life in the fallen world. In many cases, we need it to survive. When we exercise our capacity apart from the fear of the Lord that is the beginning of wisdom (Job 28:28; Ps 111:10; Prov 1:7; 9:10; 15:33), technology enhances and enables our tendency to live independent of God.

Prior to the Fall, humans work (Gen 2:15) and interact with creation (2:19-20) while naked. They work without clothing which is one of the more basic technologies. After the Fall, the first narrated act of humankind is to respond to their vulnerability by creating technology in the form of fig leaf coverings. Once the relationship between God, humanity, and creation is fractured, the world becomes a more hostile place (Gen 3:15-19; cf. 4:11-14). Because creation would no longer respond to humanity as it had pre-Fall, human labor became “painful” (cf. Gen 3:16, 17; 5:29) necessitating technology. 

When the context changes from pre- to post-Fall, humans find themselves “naked” and vulnerable. It isn’t that humans were naïve pre-Fall so that they didn’t recognize the vulnerability of human nakedness, but that in the pre-Fall world there was not vulnerability in being naked. Humans are not as fit for the post-Fall world requiring supplementation of human capacity via technology. 

When we are thinking of technology, we should not necessarily frame it negatively. Instead, understanding technology “as response” assumes the necessity and utility of technology in a fallen world while highlighting the distorted perspectives and responses of humans after the Fall. Our vulnerabilities, ambitions, and ignorance drive us away from God rather than toward him. We fool ourselves into thinking that we can overcome the effects of sin through technology when we need to live with an unwavering allegiance to the Triune God. Technology, like abundance (Deut 8:11-20), can drive us toward self-sufficiency when we need to realize that being dependent on and loyal to God is what makes the world work (Deut: 30:15-20).

In some of the narratives where we see what we have come to call “technology” most clearly, we also see conformity to God’s order. Unlike Babel where the people inadvertently resist God’s will or narratives in which technologies are not aligned with God’s commands (cf. Numbers 20:1-13), other narratives emphasize the alignment of technology with God’s will. Humans use materials and skill to create something in accordance with God’s commands.

God provides Noah with guidelines to ensure the ark is fit for purpose. Noah is told to build the ark from certain materials and with certain dimensions and “he did all that God commanded him” (Gen 6:22). Because Noah wants to avoid being swept away by the coming flood, he builds the ark to God’s specifications as an act of faithfulness. Building the ark is motivated by a desire to obey God.  

The Lord fills Bezalel “with the Spirit of God, with ability and intelligence, with knowledge and all craftsmanship” (Exod 31:3; cf. 35:31), so that he can make the various apparatus of the tabernacle. Bezalel’s skill allows him to build the tabernacle according to God’s design. God empowers and guides Bezalel’s technology so that it reflects reality. 

Using technology to serve God doesn’t mean there will be no negative consequences. The world is broken and our interactions with it are unpredictable. Still, these instances highlight a general sort of guidance for technology. For Christians, the non-negotiable motives driving technology are (1) an unqualified love of God and (2) a desire to serve others and God’s creation. Technology doesn’t change the governing dynamics of the world: the Lord is still our life and length of days (Deut 30:20). So what does love of God and neighbor look like when the technology is a phone or A.I. model?

Why This Matters: Human Capacity in a Digital World
If human capacity is context dependent, the question before us is not merely “what can we do?” but “what kind of context are we living in and what is it doing to us?” The digital world is a powerful environment affecting our well-being, shaping our attention, encouraging division and polarization, and rewarding content that triggers strong emotions like moral outrage and anger. Like Michigan Avenue, it is crowded with moving bodies and competing agendas. It’s easy to get bumped around, distracted, and swept along with the crowd. Like my son on that busy sidewalk, Christians may find that the digital world exposes our vulnerabilities.   

Technology entered the post-Fall world as a response to diminished human capacity. That response was often beneficial. It addressed real vulnerabilities. It also provided a dangerously effective means of living independent from God rather than in dependence on him. Technology can make us think that obedience, confession, repentance, prayer, and other spiritual practices are obsolete. It can tempt us to set aside faithfulness for efficiency, trusting in our own capacity and leaving God behind (cf. Deut 8:11-20).

One of the most obvious features of the digital age is the mismatch between ability and maturity. Digital technology has often expanded human capacity faster than our character can keep pace. We are consistently left reflecting on and reacting to new technologies that can have significant positive and negative impacts on humanity. As Christians, we must ensure that we are developing the character necessary to steward increased capacity faithfully. Discipleship should not be a reactive response to new technologies but a means of preparation in which we are engaged regardless of current or anticipated technological advancement. New capacities can amplify theologically fitting practices in those who are mature. They can also result in a less-than faithful witness when the cracks in our character lead us to adopt technological practices and set aside spiritual ones.

While we often question whether or not we, as Christians, should use certain technological tools or use those tools in a particular way, it seems more fruitful to ask whether we have been sufficiently discipled to use technology to the glory of God. Have we reached a state of maturity from which we can discern good and evil with regard to the use of a given technology (Heb 5:14)? Have we been so formed as God’s people so that our lives are governed by an unqualified allegiance to God or are we looking for someone or something else on which we can depend? Technology use is not separate from discipleship; it emerges from it. Who we are in Christ must govern what technology we use, how we use it, and why. 

Conclusion
As an extension of humanity, technology reflects our interests, agendas, strengths, and shortcomings.  Even when humans have noble motives, our agendas tend to get away from us. Trying to mend the broken world is like touching one side of a baby’s mobile—the other sides inevitably move in ways we don’t control and can’t anticipate. The world won’t be fixed through technology because even the most advanced technologies cannot transcend humanity’s limitations. 

Because of our vulnerabilities, humans often need technology. It is as necessary as it is unpredictable. We must, however, avoid the notion that technology is anything more than a provisional solution—a way of dealing with the challenges of a broken world until God makes all things new. 

Understanding technology as response—involving objects, knowledge, activities, and volition—provides us with a framework for evaluating any technological development, from ancient fig leaves to modern artificial intelligence. The key question is not whether a technology is inherently good or evil, but whether our response through that technology reflects dependence on God or an attempt at independence from him. As we consider what it means to be human in our particular digital context, this framework will guide our discernment: Does this digital tool enhance our capacity to love God, love neighbor, and serve creation or does it tempt us toward the illusion of self-sufficiency that has plagued humanity since the garden?


